---
title: Sysrev Mini-Grants: Funding for open-access reviews
description: Apply for financing on your next document review.  Academic literature review, systematic review or any other data source review will receive $1000 rewards.  
---
# 

Sysrev provides funding for interesting small projects.  Previously
funded projects include:

1.  [A systematic map of global insect population and diversity
    trends.](https://sysrev.com/u/371/p/16612)
2.  [COVID 19 and Chronic Kidney
    Disease](https://sysrev.com/u/249/p/29506)

**At this time we are not actively funding projects.
 [Subscribe](https://blog.sysrev.com/subscribe/) to this blog or sign up
at [sysrev.com](https://sysrev.com/) to be notified when new mini-grants
are opened!**

## Description of Mini-grant proposals

Proposed projects could use pubmed title/abstracts, upload a set of
pdfs, or define a custom text based data source.  All data resulting
from your review will be open access so that anybody can download or
view the results.

Our hope is that these mini-grants will create data that can be re-used
by application developers, future reviewers and researchers.

<figure>
<img src="https://sysrev-docs.s3.amazonaws.com/_posts/blog/content/images/2019/07/sysrev-diagram-2.svg" class="kg-image" alt="The basic workflow for a sysrev review. See an example where reviewers extracted genes from text." /><figcaption aria-hidden="true">The basic workflow for a sysrev review. See <a href="https://sysrev.com/p/3144">an example</a> where reviewers extracted genes from text.</figcaption>
</figure>

For example, the [gene hunter](https://sysrev.com/p/3144) project paid
reviewers $0.50 per article reviewed to extract genes from a pubmed
abstracts.  This made possible
[whichgenesmatter.com](http://whichgenesmatter.com) which associates
genes with medical queries.  

Institutions, individuals, and teams in the United States are allowed
for this round of mini-grants. **The winning proposal will receive a
$1000 Sysrev.com credit**. Applicants must read the Contest &
Eligibility Rules below before submitting.  Two mini-grants will be
selected based on the selection criteria below.

## Why Mini-Grants?

Careful document review is more important today than ever before.
 Research documents are being produced today at an unprecedented rate.  
Searching for answers to difficult problems in this data requires more
than a simple google search.  
Open access reviews have great potential to transform public health,
medicine, and best practices in all facets of research.   These grants
are one step towards a more transparent, collaborative and open access
future.

## What do I do with the money?

Each mini-grant consists of a $1,000 credit on Sysrev.com -- to be used
to pay for 'reviewers' to execute the winning document review.
 Reviewers on Sysrev are paid on a per document basis.  Winning
applicants may limit reviewers to their own team, or open the review to
3rd party reviewers on sysrev.com.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## What is a Sysrev?

Systematic review is a decades old method of extracting structured data
from published literature.  These reviews hold great weight on
interpretations of clinical trials, evaluation of medical procedures,
and even on public policy.  Unfortunately, the existing review system is
opaque.  It's impossible to see the actual review process behind any
systematic review publication.  

Systematic review is in need of the same open source revolution that
happened to programming.  Sysrev.com facilitates this transformation by
being the first open access review platform.  For example, you can find
public reviews on google (try "Sysrev Gene Hunter") or on the sysrev
[search page](https://sysrev.com/search?q=cancer&p=1&type=projects).
 Within a public review you can see exactly which articles were
reviewed, by whom, and what data they extracted.

You can learn how to get started with Sysrev on our introduction video:

# An error occurred.

[Try watching this video on
www.youtube.com](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JwIn1ZxfbQk), or enable
JavaScript if it is disabled in your browser.

Learn to create a sysrev in just a few minutes.

## Can I help?

Yes! If you are passionate about open access review and want to support
this work please contact me at tom@sysrev.com.

Want to be more directly involved? Become a paid sysrev reviewer! Learn
how on the [github
wiki](https://github.com/sysrev/Sysrev_Documentation/wiki/Become-a-Paid-Reviewer).

## Contest & Eligibility Rules

  
**1)** Applicants must be over 18-years old and residents of the
Continental United States. Applicants may not be former or current
employees of Sysrev.  
  
**2)** Applicants may submit proposals as an individual, as a part of a
team, or on behalf of an organization.  By submitting a proposal on
behalf of an organization, the submitting person(s) asserts they have
the legal right and authority to represent said organization.  
  
**3)** Individuals can submit, or be included on, multiple proposals.  
  
**4)** By submitting a proposal, the applicant, and/or the organization
they represent, agree to utilize the mini-grant to fund said proposal
should they win.  Applicant accepts that the mini-grant RFP prize is a
credit on Sysrev.com and cannot be exchanged for any other service,
good, or currency.  
  
**5)** By submitting a proposal, the applicant, and/or the organization
they represent, give Sysrev the right to publicize, market, and/or
advertise their proposal and any relevant information, including but not
limited to the applicant's name and affiliation.

**6)** Failure to adhere to these rules may result in a revocation of
the awarded mini-grant.  
  
7) Applicant understands that 20% of reviewer payments are charged as a
fee to sysrev.com.  Please see the sysrev [terms of
use](https://sysrev.com/terms-of-use).  
  
8) Applicant agrees to abide by the sysrev [terms of
use](https://sysrev.com/terms-of-use).

**9)** All proposals are due by Sept 23 at 11:59pm EST.

## Selection Criteria

Proposal Feasibility - 25 pts  
Clarity of Objective - 25 pts  
Knowledge of literature space or other data sources - 25 pts  
Team (including reviewer plan) - 25  

