---
title: Pharmacovigilance -- "Living Reviews" Applied
description: Pharmacovigilance means a continuous stream of information that must be evaluated. "Living Reviews" help to organize and leverage dynamic data sources.
---
As Dr. Jon Brock discussed last month in
[Nature](https://www.natureindex.com/news-blog/living-systematic-reviews-emerging-solution-problem-superseded-research-zika-virus),
there is a fundamental obstacle when conducting any document review,
especially systematic reviews: new information.  

The purpose of every review, regardless of its protocols, is to identify
relevant information, organize and/or extract the data, and (hopefully)
find a meaningful conclusion.  As Dr. Brock describes, the issue is that
a constant production of new information means that by the time any
conclusion is drawn, the study is outdated.  Researchers must be able to
constantly digest new information into ever-adjusting conclusions.  

"Living reviews" are an adaptation of classical review-based research
that attempt to facilitate just that.  The idea is that as new
information is produced, it is immediately funneled into the review
pipeline and evaluated by the exact same protocols as the previously
existing data.  The new (validated) data is incorporated and conclusions
adjusted as necessary.  Sounds simple - but not quite so in practice.

What happens if new information directly repudiates existing data?  What
happens when new studies suggest that the evaluation criteria and
protocols that the review has been using are flawed?  What happens when
the researchers realize there is a critical piece of information within
the studies that has been ignored?

Not only must a living review consider new information, it must consider
its own assumptions and foundations.  Moreover, it needs to do so in an
intelligent, and **transparent**, fashion.  Nowhere is this more true
than in pharmacovigilance.

According to the [World Trade
Organization](https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/42493),
*pharmacovigilance* is the science and activities relating to the
detection, assessment, understanding and prevention of adverse effects
or any other possible drug-related problems.  

What that means in practice, is that organizations conducting
pharmacovigilance must constantly consider all sorts of new types of
information: toxicological studies, clinical trials, adverse outcome
reports, and even market information.  For each type of information,
there are likely many sources – each with their own reporting style –
all of which must be considered in a standardized way.  

The solution, then, is not simply a living review, but a growing
repository of information - fed by an ever increasing number of data
streams - that informs any variety of processes and applications.  This
repository must also facilitate the review, and if necessary amendment,
of prior work – all the while logging any and all changes.

The Sysrev platform is such a solution.  The most important aspect of
pharmacovigilance is considering all the relevant information in one's
conclusions.  Users of Sysrev are able to create as many projects as
they desire which provides upmost flexibility in organizing different
data streams.  

Within a single project, users can upload as many batches of documents
as they need – tracked of course by Sysrev.  For on-going, consistent
reviews, Sysrev can even incorporate new data streams directly into the
platform.  Talk to us about our [enterprise
solutions](https://sysrev.com/pricing) to learn more.

Sysrev not only has the bandwidth to organize pharmacovigilance
documents but the technical features to analyze them in an efficient
manner.  

<figure>
<img src="https://sysrev-docs.s3.amazonaws.com/_posts/blog/content/images/2019/08/Screen-Shot-2019-08-28-at-1.49.44-PM-1.png" width="572" height="351" alt="Assorted dashboards of the &quot;Hallmarks and Key Characteristics Mapping&quot; project depicting total review progress and extracted information. Also shown: Sysrev facilitates multiple batch uploads into the same project." /><figcaption aria-hidden="true">Assorted dashboards of the <a href="https://sysrev.com/p/3588">"Hallmarks and Key Characteristics Mapping"</a> project depicting total review progress and extracted information. Also shown: Sysrev facilitates multiple batch uploads into the same project.</figcaption>
</figure>

Admins are able to define inclusion/exclusion criteria, as well as
manage which data is being extracted.  The Admin Dashboard gives the
project manager the information they need to evaluate the progress of
the review, including user and label
[concordance](https://blog.sysrev.com/user-inclusion-concordance/).  

Projects can easily be cloned for a variety of reasons: record keeping,
amending past work, extracting new data from existing sources, or adding
new sources of information to be considered.  Sysrev tracks the flow of
sources and data through the entire review pipeline.  As shown below for
the ["Hallmarks and Key Characteristics
Mapping"](https://sysrev.com/p/3588) project, Sysrev even learns to
predict which documents should be included or excluded.  With sufficient
training, Sysrev can vastly reduce the time associated with reviews, by
minimizing time spent on irrelevant or non-qualifying information.

<figure>
<img src="https://sysrev-docs.s3.amazonaws.com/_posts/blog/content/images/2019/08/Screen-Shot-2019-08-28-at-1.50.46-PM-1.png" width="568" height="369" alt="Sysrev can predict which documents will be included or excluded. The left picture shows Sysrev&#39;s predictions for the ~2400 articles already reviewed in the project. The right picture shows the predicted probability of inclusion for the remaining ~55,000 articles." /><figcaption aria-hidden="true">Sysrev can predict which documents will be included or excluded. The left picture shows Sysrev's predictions for the ~2400 articles already reviewed in the project. The right picture shows the predicted probability of inclusion for the remaining ~55,000 articles.</figcaption>
</figure>

The final extension of the Sysrev platform is automation.  When review
tasks are sufficiently standardized, such as extracting information from
an MSDS... or when the extracted data is used in sufficiently
standardized way, such as filling out a [ICSR
E2B(R3)](https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/e2br3-electronic-transmission-individual-case-safety-reports-implementation-guide-data-elements-and)...
there is an opportunity to utilize artificial intelligence to automate
the task.  [Contact us](sales@sysrev.com) to learn more about developing
custom artificial intelligence applications for your enterprise.

