---
title: Sysrev Helps Create Chemical Transparency for Manufacturers
description: SysRev allowed us to remotely extract chemical information from SDSs at three separate facility locations using multiple people.  The process was easy, verifiable,  inexpensive...
---
*"The process was easy, verifiable,  inexpensive and helped us achieve
our chemical management goals and obtain LEVEL® sustainability
certification for our products.”*

The “radical transparency” movement is impacting how customers assess
purchasing decisions of manufactured products.  For many companies, this
trend has caught them unprepared to respond to customer inquiries
concerning potential chemicals of concern (CoC) as their customers are
demanding to know more about the chemical ingredients used in
transforming raw materials into their final products.

The diversity and use of chemicals, especially in consumer products and
building materials, continues to grow. According to the [American
Chemistry Council](https://www.americanchemistry.com/), chemicals are
now used in 96% of manufactured materials and products. It is estimated
that there are currently over 80,000 chemicals on the market, with an
average of 2,000 more being introduced each year.

[SRG](http://sustainableresearchgroup.com/) is assisting its
manufacturing clients to build a strong foundation to incorporate CoC
transparency into their product offerings. The solution being devised by
SRG is a combination of existing sound management practices combined
with innovative software technology.  Good chemical management practices
are the basis of a well-developed CoC strategy. This requires a chemical
management plan that covers purchasing decisions, inventory control,
health and safety training, oversight of chemical use and the final
disposition of managed chemicals.

The most accessible point for beginning to develop a plan is collecting
current Safety Data Sheets (SDSs) for each chemical used in the product,
the process and during maintenance operations.  SRG enters all relevant
chemical data into its Excel-based Chemical Management Tool and the tool
then sorts the chemicals to highlight any that are identified within a
dataset as a chemical of concern.  The datasets of CoCs may be different
for each company and could include [EPA’s SARA Title III
chemicals](https://www.epa.gov/laws-regulations/summary-emergency-planning-community-right-know-act),
[California Proposition 65
Chemicals](https://oehha.ca.gov/proposition-65/proposition-65-list), the
[European Union’s REACH
chemicals](https://echa.europa.eu/substances-restricted-under-reach), or
the [Living Building Challenges](https://living-future.org/lbc/) “Red
List” of chemicals. These lists help manufacturers identify chemicals
within their processes or products that may pose serious risk to both
human and environmental health.

Over time as a company’s CoC chemical datasets becomes more complete the
company will be able to quickly and efficiently track or search an
individual chemical, or groups of chemicals to obtain answers for the
company and its customers.  SRG is now partnering with a new software
developer called [Sysrev](https://sysrev.com/p/4047) to help automate
the data entry process of Safety Data Sheet (SDS) information.  The
partnership will help reduce data entry time, human error, and provide
additional cross-referencing capabilities to other chemical databases.
 In its first year of using [Sysrev](https://sysrev.com/p/4047), SRG
assisted in modifying the software’s approach to help its clients enter
chemical and safety information from thousands of SDSs.

<figure>
<img src="https://sysrev-docs.s3.amazonaws.com/_posts/blog/content/images/2019/10/Screen-Shot-2019-10-31-at-10.00.39-AM-1.png" width="2302" height="784" alt="SRG uses Sysrev to extract information from SDSs. Left: Project description for Project 4047. Right: Histogram of extracted data." /><figcaption aria-hidden="true">SRG uses Sysrev to extract information from SDSs. Left: Project description for <a href="https://sysrev.com/p/4047">Project 4047</a>. Right: Histogram of extracted data.</figcaption>
</figure>

According to Ed Taylor, Vice President of [Environamics,
Inc](http://www.environamics-inc.com/). *“Using SRG’s version of Sysrev
allowed us to remotely extract chemical information from SDSs at three
separate facility locations using multiple people.  The process was
easy, verifiable,  inexpensive and helped us achieve our chemical
management goals and obtain LEVEL® sustainability certification for our
products.”*

In the future, the development team is working to automate the data
entry process using “[machine
learning](https://blog.sysrev.com/machine-learning/)” to include other
inputs such as invoices, labels, and technical sheets beyond SDSs and to
speed up the overall data entry and assessment process even more.  The
end-result is a rapid response to complex chemical transparency
inquiries.

